Lecture 1 Summary: Git, GitHub, and Version Control
Introduction
In this lecture, we explore Git and GitHub, crucial tools for version control in web development. These tools help manage changes, collaboration, and track project evolution efficiently.

Git
Git is a command-line tool for version control that:

Tracks changes in code, allowing you to save snapshots of your work.
Syncs code between collaborators, ensuring everyone works with the same files.
Enables branching to test new features or code without affecting the main project.
Allows reverting to earlier versions if needed.
Key concept: A Git repository is where project files are stored, either locally (on your computer) or remotely (on GitHub).

GitHub
GitHub is an online platform for storing Git repositories, facilitating collaboration and providing features like:

Repository creation: Stores projects and tracks changes.
Forking: Allows users to create a copy of a project to modify independently.
Pull Requests: Enables suggesting changes to a project, often used in open-source contributions.
GitHub Pages: Lets users publish static websites directly from a GitHub repository.
Commits
A commit is a saved snapshot of your project at a certain point. After making changes to a file:

Run git add <file> to stage the file (or git add . for all files).
Run git commit -m "message" to save changes with a description.
Use git push to send commits to a remote repository.
If there are new changes on GitHub, first run git pull to sync.
Merge Conflicts
When collaborating, multiple people might edit the same file, leading to merge conflicts. Git marks conflicting sections, and users must resolve the differences manually.

Branching
Branches allow development on a separate version of your project without affecting the main branch (often master). After testing, you can merge the branches together.

git branch: Shows your current branch.
git checkout -b <branch name>: Creates and switches to a new branch.
git merge <branch name>: Merges a branch into the current one.
More GitHub Features
Forking: Copies another person’s repository to work on independently.
Pull Requests: Propose changes to the original repository after forking.
GitHub Pages: Publish static websites directly from GitHub.
Essential Git Commands:
git init
Initializes a new Git repository.

git clone <url>
Clones a remote repository to your local machine.

git add <file> / git add .
Stages changes for the next commit (use . for all files).

git commit -m "message"
Creates a commit with a message describing your changes.

git push
Pushes committed changes to the remote repository.

git pull
Fetches and merges changes from the remote repository to your local copy.

git status
Displays the status of the repository and staged files.

git branch
Lists all branches and shows which one you are on.

git checkout -b <branch>
Creates and switches to a new branch.

git merge <branch>
Merges changes from another branch into the current branch.

git log
Shows a history of commits in the repository.

git reset --hard <commit>
Resets your project to a previous commit (useful for undoing mistakes).